#Introduction:

To my amateur eye, there are undeniable parallels between the current political, ecological, and social state of the world, and John B Calhoun’s experiments on overpopulation, societal collapses, and the ultimate 
psychological cost of decadence. The applicability of his experiments to human society has been disputed, as has been his interpretation of the results, but even if you consider the entire experiment to be fiction, it is a 
compelling analogy for our own current condition in more than one way; in any case, I believe it deserves a second examination. If you have read about this experiment, skip ahead. If not, here is a summary.
An enclosure for Norway rats was built. They were supplied with unlimited food and water. It was expected that given no obvious impediments to their growth, the population would keep growing into the thousands over the course 
of about two years. Instead, across iterations, the experiment would invariably end with the opposite: the mice would breed rapidly initially, but soon the population would level off, then following by the rats breaking up 
into small cliques comprising of a dozen or so individuals; individual rats would develop hostile, anti-social and sedentary habits, and eventually, the population would die out entirely. Among those iterations, was Universe 
25. It had a nearly three square-meter enclosure, consisting of four pens with two hundred and fifty-six living compartments, and sixteen burrows leading to abundant food and water supplies. Each living compartment could 
house up to fifteen individual rats, with an overall capacity of three thousand.
A clean, comfortable enclosure with an endless supply of food and water, with no diseases or predators around, was as close to luxury as a rat could ever get. Into this paradise, the experiment began with four pairs of 
healthy mice. The first hundred or so days were spent acclimating to their new surroundings, marking territory, and nesting. Soon after, the rats began taking advantage of their resources, and breeding rapidly, with the 
population doubling every two months. By the end of about a year, the enclosure contained over six hundred mice. And then began their decline. The number of rats at this point was about a fifth of what the enclosure could 
hold. And yet, most rats seemed to prefer crowding in specific areas, sharing the same food sources. This constant huddling soon gave way to a decline in mating activity, with the birth rate falling to about a third of its 
original level. Of the rats in the enclosure at this point, a third emerged as socially dominant, with the other two-thirds showing marked decline in social skills and status. Behavioral disparities among males of different 
social stature became more marked. Those individuals at the bottom of the social order found themselves spurned by females, and eventually abandoned trying to mate altogether. With no need to hunt and no mate, these rats had 
no function with their society. These outcasts would soon peel off the group entirely, eating and sleeping on their own, or fighting with other outcasts. The dominant males on the other hand, became more aggressive, often 
needlessly so, violently attacking other individuals with no provocation or motive, indiscriminately raping other rats - irrespective of their sex. Most other males that comprised the middle of the social order, grew timid 
and passive, accepting violent attacks without protests, often dying in the process, even being cannibalized in several instances. With the males having abandoned (or been deprived of) their social functions, females were 
left to adopt male roles during the rearing of pups. Consequently, some adopted more aggressive behaviour, with their own young being the victims of this frequently. Others shirked their own functions as well, abandoning 
their own litter and withdrawing from mating activities. Infant mortality reached nearly ninety percent. About a year and a half into the experiment, the population started to decline. Infant mortality was now about a hundred 
percent. From these circumstances rose another social group, the rats that had reached maturity but had grown up in extremely dysfunctional circumstances, and indeed, had never been exposed to a normal society with healthy 
relationships. With no concept of, and interest in ‘normal’ social activities and interactions like mating or marking territory, this group spent all their waking time eating, drinking, and grooming themselves. These 
‘beautiful ones’ as Calhoun called them, lived in seclusion. They avoided the anarchic social conditions by rejecting society itself. With every fundamental motivation that drives life having made irrelevant, no need to 
establish a territory or find a mate or raise young or hunt for food, these individuals found themselves in a society that had no need for them. Individuals were reduced to aimless, self-absorbed entities that did nothing, 
for there was nothing to do. The population eventually died out entirely.  Calhoun called this the second death – the first was, in his view, the beginning of the end, the complete loss of purpose in the rats’ lives. He 
attempted to salvage this implosion by placing some of the ‘beautiful ones’ into new enclosures that had not fallen to the anarchic conditions of their own, hoping the change in circumstances might wake them from their 
anti-social catatonia. He failed. The rats simply would not change their behaviour. The eventually died out of natural causes, alone. Universe 25 peaked at 2200 rats. None of them survived.
The applicability of the above results as an unnervingly accurate metaphor for our own current state is obvious; indeed, the only danger here is of over-interpretation. After all, even the world today resembles Calhoun’s rat 
utopia, we are not rats, and it seems we may have more agency over our own fate than rats. Whether that will make a difference at all remains to be seen. I do not believe it does; studying rats and their behaviour allows us a 
certain objectivity we cannot muster when studying ourselves, and anyway, your view will depend on whether you see the rats as sentient beings with their own will and volition, or as a lower being that functions like an 
automaton, being driven to do things its wiring will permit it to, and nothing else, that is, whether the collapse of the rat utopia was simply the inevitable consequence of the combination of their own nature and the 
circumstances they were put in, or result of their own deliberate choices. But at the end of the day, even in humans, whether the specific choices made were deliberate, or a consequence of our wiring, is irrelevant, because 
both seem to eventually lead to extinction.

This story should stay in the back of your mind  while you read the rest of the book.

_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________


Chapter 0:

Prerequisite information:

This book is a collection of my ideas on subjects I find personally interesting. 

1. I do not know of a word or phrase that refer to the superset of all our problems, so I shall just refer to them as PRoblems, with a capital P and a capital R. PRoblems includes everything: war, disease, poverty, hunger, 
climate change, habitat desctruction, species going extinct, advertisers, Content, social media, general mental retardation across the global political sphere manifesting in spellbindingly idiotic decisions, religious people, 
dying arts, vanishing languages, the true bound of Chinese territory according to China, the war on drugs, et cetera. PRoblems.

2. Very little research has gone into this book. For reasons I might explain later, I want to write as I am, as the average person is: good at a few things, passable at a few, shit at most other thing: a group rarely heard 
from. Because I will be relying on facts from memory, they won't always be facts, though when this happens, it won't matter. Of course, all this raises obvious quality-control concerns, but worse books have made people 
writers millionaires.

3. There will be ideas I will need to refer to more than once across the book. In cases where this is not easily explained, I will make up a word, and this will be the stand-in for that idea for the rest of the book (which is 
what a word is, I suppose). The definition will be in the dictionary at the end. If you like any of these made-up words, feel free to add them to your vocabulary. One day, I hope to see a headline: "Book-readers in town 
develop sudden speech deficiencies, start speaking gibberish - medical experts baffled".

4. This book is not any of the following:
    - A new hypothesis/theory about anything.
    - A claim of having solved our Problems.
    - A claim of having solutions to our Problems.
    - A claim of having access to information others do not. 
    - A claim of having had insights others have not. 
   Most importantly, this is not a call to arms, violence, or revolution. You should not need one.

In summary, I am trying to produce an anti-book, existing in direct violation of every bit of conventional wisdom about writing. I have no confidence what this will do to an otherwise compelling narrative in my opinion - 
"nothing good" would be my bet.
Do not read this book.

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________




Introduction

I tried several ways of starting this book. I wanted to keep a somewhat academic and formal tone, but I got tired of the typing, and the verbosity irritated me. I then tried a sort of Dickens' imitation, still quite formal by 
today's standards, but peppered with hilarious absurdity, but I don't like my jokes, and anyway, too much typing. This clearly does not bode well for the rest of the book, and the pregnancy itself seems questionable at this 
point, but there is something that wants to get out, so it is going to. I will also try to be under the influence of a variety of psychoactive substances, which I expect will show on the page. I wish it weren't the case, but 
this really is the only way to complete this book. Sober as I am, I am bored already.



There are two major unsolved problems, that have been known and unsolved (with innumerable claimants armed with absurd stories) for so long that investigating these is sometimes seen with some derision, a sort of petty 
contempt for problems that are not just unsolved but entirely unapproachable, even absolutely impossible, extending to any who would waste a potentially fruitful career trying to solve these asshole-problems. These would be: 
1. What really is consciousness? 2. What is time without beings interested in measuring it? 3. What lies beyond the observable universe? 4. Is there life on other planets? 5.


Think of the amount of time, energy and resources that a little idea in my mind had to be fed, in order to put this book in your hands. Every page came from a tree that had to be killed, put to death, life 
extinguished, turned from Life to 'wood', years of growth interrupted by the need for paper, whether to write on or wipe asses with. The energy came from the food I ate, food that has its own universe of a story before it 
ever reached my plate. The journey started with a farmer somewhere, going to a government-run supply store for seeds to sow. Sometimes there are side-plots that spring up at this stage itself - a government employee in a bad 
mood, a farmer burnt-out and sick of life, vague nods and suggestions of bribes, little people negotiating little financial crimes..sometimes. The farmer must take these seeds, and sow them on his land. What follows is 
several months of extreme stress, as the clouds form but never rain, and the pests come and never leave, and the ground has been watered and crops have been harvested over and over and over so nothing grows without a solid 
dose of chemical fertilizers first. When this suspenseful build-up finally cracks with either rains or a decimated crop, the farmer either has something to sell, or he hasn't. If he does, starts the next phase - predatory 
middlemen, logistics providers, as their cartels negotiate rock bottom prices from farmers, whose only choice at this stage is to either make some money or make no money. The produce then goes to massive markets where it is 
auctioned off to the higest bidders, the bidders being grocery store owners or roadside vegetable sellers. Once here, I go and purchase what I need, paying not just for the produce, but for the livelihoods of the farmers and 
middlemen and every other parasite involved in this entire process. And then there is the carbon footprint of this chain, the secondary effects of over-fertilization and fertilizer runoff, slash-and-burn techniques, depleting 
groundwater reserves, et cetera.

The point is, it took the consumption of a huge amount of resources, and the participation of huge number of people both well-qualified and "I have relatives in politics/organized crime", an economy under the the one on the 
news where deals are done by finger signals inside interlocked fists, money flitting back and forth, a little above the table, the rest below, supplanted with surreptitious nods of understanding, a sort of "we are humans, you 
and I, and this is what we must do to keep things moving". Some get rich, some barely make ends meet, some give up, and some just die. This odyssey spanning thousands of miles, man-hours, bribes and tears, all to (among other things) fuel the creation of this book.

Which brings us to you. You will spend energy as you read this book, and like me, will require collaboration, conflict, and crime to move the food-machine that ultimately feeds you. The simple act of me writing a book, and 
you reading, affects innumerable individuals both positively and negatively, and the planet always suffers for it, from the coal burnt for the electricity or gasoline for the transport, to the eutrophication of waterbodies 
with fertilizer runoff killing off native species and allowing invaders to thrive. At this point, you have a simple choice - do you want to spend your energy on this book, or is it better spent elsewhere? This is an important 
decision, and one you must take before you proceed further; the discussions that follow and the ideas held within, require a certain mindset to even follow to their logical conclusions. This is most certainly not a mere 
recreational read. Crucially, if you have mental conditions that leave you prone to severe and debilitating despair, this is not for you. If you love your country, culture, or history, not because you have things to love 
about them but because you have been taught this is the 'correct' sentiment to have, this is not for you. If you believe in absolute morality, or divinity, this is not for you. Simply put - unless you specifically want to 
read half-developed ideas from an amateur, that will definitely confuse, frustrate, offend and infuriate - put this book down, and let us part as friends. If you are still reading, I must now describe the reasons for writing 
this in the first place - obviously, given the effects described above, especially with the idiotic self-imposed handicaps, I must have a compelling reason to not just write, but to involve more nameless, faceless people 
potentially from around the world in this ultimately pointless enterprise.
There is a cause, and there is a reason. The reason is standard: I believe I have some ideas worth charging money for.
The cause is more complicated.

Let us start with a question. 

Why can't countries agree on real action against climate change?

The politics do not interest me, nor should it you. Further, any responses on the lines of "it is an extremely complex issue with a huge number of variables" have limited utility beyond consoling angry journalists at press 
conferences. Whether you believe climate change is a real crisis, or a conspiracy to hinder otherwise explosive growth and progress is irrelevant: making sure we don't have plastic in the food we eat is an absolute good that 
needs no conditions or qualifications, and the fact that we have found microplastics in breastmilk is an absolute tragedy irrespective of your political stance. Making sure the air we breathe or the water we drink doesn't 
cause diseases is an absolute positive too, as is making sure animals don't go extinct because even a single absentee from an ecosystem can knock it wildly off balance. These are considerations that are valid and worthwhile 
even if the entire thing indeed is nonsense. In fact, climate change, by itself is of little concern - slightly warmer weather never killed anyone. But when it gets slightly warmer across the year, not only is there 'more' 
water in the water cycle, more evaporation, transpiration and precipitation, but the changes in temperatures change how air moves, which decides the larger trends in wind speeds and directions, which determines who gets 
rained on and who doesn't. The problem is not merely changes, but changes we cannot predict, effects we cannot anticipate and prepare for, and ultimately, conditions we cannot survive. It is precisely these inevitable, 
inescapable side-effects that will kill us. 

In addition, there is the aspect of responsiveness that I personally haven't seen being given the respect and attention it deserves. I describe this as follows:

Imagine a small car on a flat, frictionless strip of road. Your task is to push this with your own strength, to the end of the road. Assuming the strength required, this is how it is expected to go: an initial force is 
applied. The car does not budge. So you slowly increase the force being applied, until a critical point at which the car moves slightly, barely an inch; but the wheels have turned, and will continue to turn, because it is 
only rolling friction. You wil find that once the car starts to move, it no longer needs the same amount of effort to keep moving. In particular, the more speed it picks up, the less effort is needed to keep it moving in the 
same direction, as the cars own momentum is sufficient to take it a considerable distance.
Let us say you have, after a period of strenous physical effort, managed to speed it up so much that you need to run to keep up with it.

Now imagine the next task: to stop the car. 
To do this, you need to first run past the car and ahead of it, and place yourself in its path. Then begins the same process that was needed to bring it up to speed in the first place: start with an initial force, and 
increase it until you find a satisfactory rate of deceleration, and then just let it roll away, getting slower all the time, until it comes to a stop at some point. There are a few important observations to make here: 
1. If the force you are applying to stop the car is no greater than the force you applied to get it moving, getting it to stop will take roughly the same time, energy, and distance rolled as it did to start.
2. The amount of resources and energy required to stop the car increases the longer it has been accelerated for.
3. A hypothetical universe-travelling car that has been accelerating for a thousand years through space, will take a thousand years to decelerate and come to a halt if the force trying to decelerate it is the same as the 
force that was accelerating it.

With absolutely no formal education in climate science, it is easy to atleast get a good picture of where things stand, vis-a-vis us, the planet, and the relationship we share. The above description is applicable nearly as is to climate change, and what it would take to reverse any damage our actions might have caused. The insidious danger here is exactly the fact that the effects are so slow, sporadic, and easy to attribute to other less human causes. 
However, when one spends a moment to think about this, one can immediately see several obvious insights. Set aside the planet, climate change and Chinese conspiracies: if we abstract away all these details, and look at the most basic, absolute parts of the problem, we have two simple logical parts:
    1. A "system". We do not care what it is or what's in it. This is what we are studying, and the topic of this discussion. (Obviously, this is the earth, but this detail is irrelevant.)
    2. Us, the entities performing this 'experiment'. We know we exist. This is not a matter of contention, unless you deliberately go looking for places where it will be.
We know the following to be true:
    1. Whatever state of technological enlightenment we might be in as you read this, absolutely none of this would be possible without electricity and transportation, and therefore, fossil fuels.
    2. Our early work with fossil fuels was rough, inefficient, and stupid - but ultimately extremely limited. In the centuries since, what we gained in efficiency, we lost several times over in scale - One million cars across the world running on burning plastic is not the same as one and a half billion efficient vehicles across the world with efficient engines burning 'clean' petroleum (excluding, of course, cargo ships burning refinery leftovers).

Now, whether one believes in anthropogenic climate change or not, one simply needs to talk to farmers to be convinced that something definitely is changing, and that this did not start recently. Plants and their growing cycles are the result of millions of years of evolution under long periods of relatively stable conditions; as temperature and precipitation fluctuations  become erratic, the plants that depend on these changes to serve as triggers for their own changes, such as from vegetative growth to developing flowers and fruits, can no longer cope. This is especially true of wild species that do not have the advantage of our husbandry. Wild trees in particular tend to be quite tough, but without the right environmental triggers will simply never flower or fruit. Domesticated crops tend to be more delicate, having been primarily selected for productivity, and therefore lacking the unforgiving hand of natural selection to pick the toughest individuals to propagate and cull the rest, so the effects in farms can be anything from erratic fruiting seasons and weird, malformed fruit that received the instruction to start ripening before they could fully grow, to entire fields being wiped out because of rains that were late by a month. 
because this immediately tells us two things:: the longer we spent pumping heat and greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, the longer it will take to bring it back to it's original, pristine state, if we stopped all new emissions and focussed all of our collective global intellect and formidable wealth into reversing this damage. The more fuels that are burned for this energy, the more fuels will be needed to create the energy needed to stop this car rolling away by its own momentum. 
It is for this reason that international climate agreements, and the distant celebrations they seem to always involve, are actually far, far more useless than most realize; we are centuries past simply 'stopping' our generally destructive behavior; even if the entire planet decided to stop, it would make no difference without actively reversing our current damage. So any pledges of net-zero emissions fifty, twenty, even ten years into the future are worth less than the ink it took to print them out. Similarly, developing nations talking about a purported 'right to pollute' in order to reach some economic standard, simply do not know what we are faced with. In fact, one would be forgiven for simply giving up on life as they know it, and dedicate themselves to a life of debauchery, especially because doing so typically results in a massively reduced carbon-footprint (sex, drugs, rock and roll - very environmentally friendly pastimes) are not worth the cost of the photographers that photograph these events.
If it isn't already clear: assuming we have been engaged in activities that (even if it wasn't the intention) were perfect for a species wanting to bring up the average surface temperature of the planet for a few centuries, it will take a few centuries to get back to normal, pre-industrial levels of temperature and atmospheric conditions.
This means even if every emitter across the planet, from coal-fired power plants to cigarettes, were to be stopped immediately and permanently, the effects of our activities so far will continue to build - a planet-sized car will need a lot of time to get up to speed, but once it has, it will continue at its current state until it comes to a halt on its own - assuming there is atleast some effect providing a negative feedback. 

Surely it is possible to simply understand the need to ensure our own survival, and act accordingly while still believing climate change to be a silly hoax? The politics do not 
interest me, nor should it you. Further, any responses on the lines of "it is an extremely complex issue with a huge number of variables" have limited utility beyond consoling angry journalists at press conferences. Whether 
you believe climate change is a real crisis, or a conspiracy to hinder otherwise explosive growth and progress is irrelevant: making sure we don't have plastic in the food we eat is an absolute good that needs no conditions 
or qualifications, and the fact that we have found microplastics in breastmilk is an absolute tragedy irrespective of your political stance. Making sure the air we breathe or the water we drink doesn't cause diseases is an 
absolute positive too, as is making sure animals don't go extinct because even a single absentee from an ecosystem can knock it wildly off balance. These are considerations that are valid and worthwhile even if the entire 
thing indeed is nonsense. In fact, climate change, by itself is of little concern - slightly warmer weather never killed anyone. But when it gets slightly warmer across the year, not only is there 'more' water in the water 
cycle, more evaporation, transpiration and precipitation, but the changes in temperatures change how air moves, which decides the larger trends in wind speeds and directions, which determines who gets rained on and who 
doesn't. The problem is not merely changes, but changes we cannot predict, effects we cannot anticipate and prepare for, and ultimately, conditions we cannot survive. It is precisely these inevitable, inescapable side-effects 
that will kill us. Surely it is possible to simply understand the need to ensure our own survival, and act accordingly while still believing climate change to be a silly hoax?

Nevertheless, if there is indeed a plot to hinder progress, demanding that we clean up our environment is about as cruel as being forced to accept a lifetime's supply of beer for free. Of course, conspiracy theorists are 
merely the easiest people to ridicule, and are not nearly the most dangerous (or the most common) of the Incorrect Ones (henceforth referred to as incones) especially thanks to a new participant (let us name this personality 
type a Jope) characterised by some competence in a wildly unrelated subject, "come here child and I shall show you the truth" rather than the usual "I disagree and you are a moron", a calm, composed, patronizing, almost 
grandfatherly demeanour, watching the outraged screams of a society that can't stand itself. Importantly, the arguments from this character are rarely based in reality; indeed, much of the strategy employed by this time 
involves setting up a rhetorical framework that makes facts truly irrelevant, mere circumstantial factoids that could be more important than the Real Truth. The insidious danger this treatment of reality poses should be 
obvious; as discourse becomes increasingly rhetorical, so must the remedial tactics. A Jope's arguments tend to be vague, distant, avoiding specifics of any kind, insisting on a sort of 'meta' discussion, and emphasizing the 
The audience of science educators are exactly the people who do not need them, and the ones who do avoid anyone, scientist or layperson, that tells them they are wrong, because such is our nature.. the facts of the matter are 
inconsequential. This means the remedy lies in rhetoric as well - no one cares about your evidence. I see a certain latent hope in discussions on this subject, that seems to suggest this chronic inaction is merely a 
consequence of greed or corruption or stupidity, all solvable problems, in fact problems that simply can be fixed by bringing in the right people into power, the consequent implication being that there is indeed a 'right' set 
of powerful people who will take action and solve the problem as simply as it deserves to be. In other words, a typical treatment of the subject seems to insist it is ultimately a fixable problem - we only need to find people 
who will take there eyes off the cash for long enough. Well, what if it isn't a fixable problem? What if the current StandardOperatingProcedure of blusterous, passionate declarations of a united front formed by nations, 
united by a crisis and a potential buck to be made; vows of Real Change, Real Action, honest criticism directed at countries that aren't pulling their weight in the marketing and PR campaigns..what if all this is not merely a 
transient bug, merely a bad batch of idiot politicians that we must tolerate till their terms (or lives) end? Their public faces, atleast, seem to generally agree we are running into a catastrophe with our eyes wide open. 
Certainly, a significant amount of time and resources go into even preparing the venues for climate-conferences. An inconceivably large number of people are involved directly or indirectly in getting the leaders of all these 
nations into one room, from the security that shadows them to the housekeepers that prepare their rooms, from the farmers that grow the fine produce that the finest chefs cook fine meals with for all these dignitaries. 
Gasoline and jet fuel is burnt to get them there, as is the coal that powers their rooms. The finest wines from the finest grapes aged in the finest cellars, the finest tablecloths and cutlery and stationery and platoons of 
staff planning moves by the minute, armed guards and sniffer dogs and special services watching every square inch. Every single quantum of every single resource spent in this entire charade paid for by nearly 8 billion 
people, working jobs, running businesses, trying to make ends meet - all with the implicit expectation that once the doors close, the people in the room will get to work; if doing their jobs is a tall order, atleast 
acknowledge their own primal survival instinct, realize what is about to come, what scientists across the world have been screaming about for decades, what politicians have been pledging to fix for decades. Even if it were 
pure self-interest, simply wanting to ensure their own comfort and survival for as long as possible, surely we would see some tangible action? Nothing.
Reams of paperwork, extensive reports thousands of pages long, shock and awe and passionate speeches, furious fist pumping, sombre pledges for change, burlesque lamentations for the species that died away in the wake of our 
spectaacular progress. But again, nothing.
Well, politicians are useless, sure. They have been useless for a long time. Why should we expect any different? They come from among us. They represent us in more ways than just as an artifact of a political system; a 
politician saying abortions are a crime according to their god believes so because the followers of this god have believed so for a long time, and nearly every single follower today, every screaming anti-abortion (I loathe 
the term pro-life) ‘activist’ comes from among us. Every corrupt, criminal, rapey, retarded public figure, every racist celebrity, every well-connected pedophile, every school-shooter, every person from the LGBTQIA+ group, 
the ones that love them, the ones that don’t mind them, the ones that hate them and the ones that wish they’d all die - we all come from the same social factory.
And here emerges the larger problem. 
Of the myriad social, cultural, economic, and ecological problems we are currently battling, there is not a single issue that has not existed and known of for atleast a few decades. People at the ends of every bell curve have 
always been made to feel unwanted to varying degrees, our fear of people we do not understand has always manifested as hate and senseless contempt; We have been arguing about more or less, the same set of problems for 
decades, if not centuries; equality, equity, morality, justice, on and on it goes, generation after generation, saying the same things over and over again. The lack of progress is frequently (and conveniently) ascribed to the 
‘complexity’ of these problems - an administration’s incompetence is excused in the same way a child’s is - by placing the blame on the problem. But these are not complex problems, nor are they difficult to solve. They are 
infuriatingly difficult to put into practice, sure, but any attempt at changing these circumstances must first start with identifying the problem correctly: and the problem is our inability to implement solutions - not the 
complexity of the problems themselves, the impediments being more to do with ourselves and our emergent behavior over global scales. Our successes as a species, especially over the last few centuries, have eliminated the 
question of ability or competence from our collective minds, resulting in an obscene overestimation of what we are capable of achieving. We see ourselves as limitless by design; anything we put our hearts and heads to, we can 
achieve. Together. This kind of oppressive positivity tends to originate from societies that can afford to be stupidly optimistic - often relatively developed ones; I do not think there were Jews during the holocaust, or 
Yazidi girls in Yemen and Syria today with this particular brand of psychological thumb-sucking (if we only believe….). This is a problem. We are animals, with a certain set of individual or social habits that define our 
behavior as a species. Bar a microscopic minority, we are incapable of defying this behavior. Our traits and personality, an often poisonous stew of parental and parent-induced effects, genes, personal, social and political 
circumstances, and evolutionary pressures that continue to effect everything, everywhere, all the time, reduce the apparently infinite universal skill-tree into a tepid set of traits that is nearly universal - laziness, 
greed, indifference, and cowardice. We see our failures as anomalies in an otherwise decent record, inspite of knowing they’re the same failures, across time. This isn’t just cynicism or pessimism, nor is this new 
information. There is a massive canyon of impotence between what we can do and what nature allows. So we find generation after generation, waste away trying to solve the same stupid problems. This is what it comes down to. 
Every other argument is a silly excuse. We will never see a world without rapists, or pedophiles, or corrupt politicians, morally bankrupt industrialists, bigots, racists, religious idiots, animal torturers, and warmongerers. 
Nearly every war we have ever waged on others has been either over real estate or fantasies involving wish-fulfilling beings that require monetary contributions to their agents on earth, and this will continue exactly as it 
always has.  We will never rid the world of discrimination and inequality. We will never stop destroying habitats and ecosystems, and we will never stop using fossil fuels. In spite of passionate rejections of doom-and-gloom 
assessments of our circumstances, we know. It is unfashionable to admit this in polite society, and blind, pigheaded optimism has been one of our potent salve against the crushing weight of the consequences of our own 
actions. Before we can even wish for a way to make our problems disappear, we need intention - the people whose opinions and decisions matter must first want to act beyond speeches, pledges and agreements. This won’t happen.

As I shall show over the course of this book, I believe the true cause of this apparent inability to make real progress (as opposed to mere economic growth) stems from our deliberate refusal to acknowledge universal human 
traits that have underlined our behavior across history. Our firm belief in our own status as the pinnacle of evolution has led us to insist some of our most fundamental (and distasteful) qualities are merely unfortunate 
accidents in a world where moral uprightness is the norm.

So what would a realistic solution look like? 

Further, if there is a remedy at all, it must reliably break us out of the hole we find ourselves in, expectedly backed by existential threats and the destruction of the environment that keeps us alive, by our own hand. 
Legislation attempting to enforce ideas of ‘moral good’ onto an already disaffected populace is not just pointless, but a slow but steady walk towards a tipping point followed by global anarchy. Crucially, this is not simply 
a problem with political groups or even their increasingly radical rhetoric; after all, even the most evil politicians are products of the society that formed them. Conservative political parties exist, politicians with 
conservative views exist, because people with conservative views exist, same as liberals; leaders with extreme views exist because people with extreme views exist; terrorists exist not as isolated anomalies in an otherwise 
perfect world, but as merely the subset of a deliberately under-examined superset of people (for political reason) who agree with these extreme philosophies and ideas, that were willing to kill and/or die for the cause, same 
as literally any cause or country in the world. As has been painfully obvious across multiple invasions of adventure across many parts of the world under the banner of anti-terrorism or the Great War on Drugs, killing 
individuals from these groups, or even their leaders has little effect if there are still sufficient numbers of people, even if apparently moderate, do subscribe to these same ideologies under the table; as with every 
religious insurgency, there will be weapons, and there will be civilian casualties eventually. The most powerful countries in the world are stuck bickering with their own citizens on ultimately inconsequential issues like 
abortions (a world with abortions is nearly identical to a world without: the only difference is happier women and lesser traffic), because there are sufficiently many people in the citizenry that have passionate stances for 
and against abortions, and are prepared to spend their time debating the moments at which a foetus becomes a conscious being, while species get wiped out, and entire nations get tormented by an increasingly capricious and 
ill-tempered climate. It is easy to call those involved in the making of these decisions psychopaths, parasites that are quite literally selling future generations, and this is in fact how they are often written about. It is 
easy to succumb to the same detached nihilism we know so well today, or to just shrug, shake our heads and tut in silent resignation. Now, I do not really care about human extinction; I see our current behavior as an 
inevitable consequence of our nature, and specifically our aspirations that are fundamentally opposed to our nature and therefore doomed to fail. In any case human survival was never an important issue for me; I have seen 
entire habitats razed to the ground, species wiped out, my favourite places in the world shat upon and carbonized, our own immediate surroundings fucked one little piece of plastic at a time - I have little sympathy for our 
kind, especially because I am part of it, and therefore guilty of the same crimes, the same self-destructive behaviour, if not on the same scales. But one must admit, to start with a pristine, spectacular planet, the sort 
that inspired people to invent gods just to thank them for its beauty, and destroy it in less than ten thousand years of civilization is a truly monumental achievement, especially so considering this was not something we were 
trying to achieve - this came naturally to us; since the first human used a piece of flint to scratch a drawing onto the wall of a cave for the first time, every individual and collective decision that was invariably locally 
sensible (culturally, economically, temporally), led us to our current position, one step at a time. Each of us is a dot on a page of human history, and while it can seem endless at times, it is barely a blip in a cosmic 
sense - remember, one of our first major achievements as a species - emerging as the sole survivor of almost a dozen species of hominins we once shared our land with, all the more impressive considering we actually interbred 
with some of them, predated all civilization. If one considers ourselves, modern humans, to be the pinnacle of evolution (by any metric), these sister species were as close to it as a species could get, with comparable 
intelligence and abilities- and yet we are the only ones left. Of course, we do not know why this is, so there is little point in implying our species had any role to play in their demise (much less make a point about some 
inherent evil within us), but it is also undeniable that there was SOME reason we survived. If we did not actively (or passively) cause their extinction, there must have been a specific advantage we have, that those other 
species did not. There has been significant research on this subject, and we still do not know why we were the only survivors during a relatively comfortable time (their problems were not easy either, but they were simple), 
mostly because hominin fossils are so rare. As an aside, every time I see a building being constructed, I imagine an excavator tearing through some history-rewriting fossil, some artifact of monumental importance that would 
fill in the gaps in our knowledge of our history, and my heart breaks a little. Imagine how many such artifacts we probably have obliterated, how many of those languish under prisons and brothels and drug dens and government 
offices and sewage pipelines, how many remains of our ancient past people have kissed or killed standing over, the wars fought, the bombs dropped, the drills and borewells shoved through, how many activities our species 
partakes in, and how much of our past and present we wipe out. It is paralyzing. Anyway. Common assessments of this phenomenon are performed through the eyes of a human observer standing within human society as a human, 
perceiving through human eyes, percolating information through layers of human biases, ideologies and cultural beliefs.

But something fundamental to our collective consciousness has changed in the past few decades; I see it in the lyrics to songs, singers that went from singing about human experiences, love, loss, tragedy, power, and 
heartbreak - to money, violence, and rage, even in love. I see a shift not in our values, but the things we value. I see it in TV interviews, from the quiet, deep and dignified interviews of Dick Cavett, to the unhinged, 
impotent screams of anchors and talk-show hosts today. I see it in the fading away of the appreciation of real art, music, and literature, the death of social consciousness, the tacit approval and even encouragement of 
qualities, that while extremely human, were still qualities that were considered to be detestable for much of human history (for good reason), the frequent confusion of aspirational ideals with 'toxic' social demands, and 
broadly, the death of such valuable and powerful ideas like dignity, patience, honesty, nobility, and honor. Now, I cannot be sure if this is just my own bias; after all, every generation believes the generation following it 
is a morally bankrupt horde of intellectual blanks. What I can be sure of, is the fact that a change has occurred, especially visible in children that were born and grew up in a world that already had internalized social 
media. I will elaborate on this in a later chapter, but I believe one of the most important qualities of our species, that spurred us to action even when action was needed, and often led to groundbreaking inventions and 
discoveries that made the world the way it is today - boredom. True boredom, the mental itch one can’t scratch that signals the need for intellectual, emotional or physical stimulation, is what prompted us to seek ways of 
amusing ourselves, experimenting, digging holes, and stacking rocks and setting fire to things and throwing around seeds from plants. Without this itch, a mind that is completely satisfied, entertained, will do nothing but 
continue to be satisfied and entertained, a happy, but ultimately useless mass of meat. Now, is this a bad thing? Perhaps not; one might argue that this tranquil satisfaction is the ultimate cosmic duty of every living entity 
on the planet. Perhaps my own obsession with preserving some purportedly amazing human traits is misguided to begin with, given that these same traits were a product of evolution by natural selection, meaning that only traits 
that provide an advantage for survival over other populations that do not have this trait, persist, and therefore it stands to reason that these traits need not be selected for if they provide no advantage. The world today 
requires very little effort to be alive in, and clearly does not differentiate between the noble and the ignoble, the good and the evil, or the smart and stupid; we are all on equal ground, and the dominant view is simply the 
loudest one.

The question therefore, in my view, is not 'how' we can solve our problems, but why we find ourselves unable to. There are obvious ideas that have seen sporadic mentions, but those tend to confine themselves to some form of 
social theory, and generally rest on the assumption that this incumbent general incompetence is an anomaly, with a more grounded, if mawkish, explanation like greed. With climate change, for example, no matter how serious our 
circumstances and how elegant our solutions, we need it to be 'economically feasible'. Economic feasibility is an artificial requirement, one we have introduced ourselves. It is in our power to make an exception to our sacred 
capitalism, and implement solutions (even if incomplete or suboptimal) to increase the number of generations after ours that can realistically continue to survive our rapidly changing planet. There is no cosmic barrier 
stopping us from abandoning coal power plants and building nuclear reactors, for example (the claim of nuclear reactors being dangerous is nonsense - we know how to build them safely and well, and we have done so all around 
the world. Disasters occur when standards are not adhered to.). There is nothing stopping us from banning cigarettes globally, even knowing beyond a shadow of doubt that smoking-related illnesses are not just local tragedies 
but an enormous national cost. Nothing, except our preferences, which seem to be almost always detrimental to our existence, or that of the other creatures we share our ecosystems with. So why are we the way we are, and are 
we getting worse?

As we speak, we share our world with people who enjoy torturing baby animals, people who enjoy sex with children, women desperate enough to allow themselves to be subjected to inhumane torture for money living close to people 
who will gladly pay to torture a naked and defenseless person, world leaders who are still trying to expand their national territory, armies holding their own people hostage, coprophiliacs, flat earthers, religious 
fundamentalists, people who hate religious fundamentalists, people who have generalized their hate for religious fundamentalism to entire religions, cultures, or nations, people who hate the people who hate religious 
fundamentalists, people who hate people of a specific complexion, or national origin, language, physical appearance, people killing rhino's for their horns for longer erections, elephants for their tusks, tigers for their 
claws, sharks for their fins, rapists, murders ... an increasing percentage of the constellation of activities that we engage in as a species, the locus of everything we do, seems to be actively harmful to us, our 
environment, or the other creatures that live in it. As I see it, we are currently engaged in a process of cleaning house, a good thing; only as we allow the unnecessary self-imposed restrictions on gender expression or 
sexual orientation (among other things) to fall away, we have also allowed a precipitous fall in our individual standards of propriety. As always, we see the ends as justifying the means, and as has been the case throughout 
our history as species, when a group of people is convinced it has moral right on its side (whether self-assigned or divinely proclaimed), the baby goes out with the bathwater, and once this happens, there is no way to return 
to civilized discourse. Under the layers of nonsense that our public institutions seem to collect, the meaningless rituals, the pomp and show and dull procedures and reams of paperwork, there exists a style of formal 
communication that was constructed carefully over many years, for a simple reason - there are situations where conversations need to be predictable.

To make matters worse, this change is not isolated to a single country or culture, but seems to be happening across nations. This compounds our problem, because each culture has its own cultural universe, with its own laws, 
unspoken rules, priorities and definitions of good and bad. Even within a culture, there are more or less equally powerful ideological factions, each with constitutionally mandated rights to free speech. Somehow, the most 
oppressive ideas are common to these disparate, disconnected cultures; an American Christian conservative likely agrees with Middle-Eastern Muslim conservatives, or Indian Hindu conservatives, in the idea that homosexuality 
is a depraved defiance of god's divine instruction. At the same time, I see us running out of energy, a species so burnt out it really cannot be bothered with more arguments anymore; the socially conscious are either young 
screaming lunatics that have the energy and passion for revolution, but neither the skill nor the focus, or burnt out husks sheltering at home hurling abuse at inanimate objects. We are increasingly less able to deal with the 
firehose of information, social media, news, and shit television; while it is true that there is just too much information flying around, our own ability to keep up seems to be shrinking. Like African elephants now being born 
tuskless (we like killing tuskers), we seem to have managed to shrink our mental holding cells even further, narrowing the informational inlets even further. And yet, despite changing societies and its members, some traits 
seem to stubbornly persist across generations; advantageous qualities provide no advantage, undesirable traits do not prove to be a disadvantage, and whatever evolutionary processes still occur in humans, now function 
completely differently - desirable qualities no longer get selected for (naturally), and undesirable qualities no longer disappear. Our problems are not just the problem anymore - we are battling our tendency to keep getting 
stuck in positions like this, while being very close, if not over, the limits of the amount of information our human brains can meaningfully process at once.

Most research on this subject comes from qualified experts (as it should), philosophers, psychologists, scientists and religious leaders, who have spent many years studying and researching and understanding the human 
condition through the lens of their own field. This is obviously invaluable work from an academic perspective, but I do not think we have the time to wait for the findings and warnings of all this research to organically 
trickle down into our collective consciousness and awaken our latent sense of fear and responsibilty. In my opinion, what is actually needed is not merely an understanding of our current circumstances, but also of the 
underlying qualities that led us here. We need to look at our current circumstances not as natural progressions from our previous states, but as isolated problems affecting an isolated planet, in an isolated time, without 
getting bogged down with historical details and sentimental considerations. Of course, it is almost certain that any results achieved with these qualitative demands would be impractical, but one, it isn't like practical 
suggestions have a likelihood of being adopted soon enough to matter anyway, and two, I haven't even understood the problem entirely yet. Therefore, for the purposes of this text, we will assume no moral values, no laws, and 
no ideological determinations of right and wrong and no specialized education, and attempt to reason our way out of this rut. I need to understand, as best as I can, everything I know, from my own perception, my mind, my 
conscious self, the implicit flaws in our construction and the consequent risks we incur, and then explore, how our flaws as individuals conspire with our flaws as a social species, and take us from uncivilized, free beasts 
roaming a bountiful planet to a miserable and diseased species choking itself with its own money. Finally, for the Average Human to benefit from any structural changes in our collective thought process or philosophies, they 
must be voluntary adoptions from the ground up, and not suggestions from authorities from the top down. In addition, for such structural changes to even be considered for potential acceptance, it must appeal to the vast 
majority of people, who do not have the education, interest, exposure, or ability to learn enough about human history, anthropology, archeology, psychology, physics, and political science to have a 'correct' view of the 
world, meaning there can be no overreliance on absolutes, no laws that end in "that is just how it is", and that this system must make sense intuitively and immediately, while allowing one to comfortably perceive and process 
information and avoid incorrect decisions without demanding years of formal education. After all, one curious click on a flat-earth video thumbnail, one curious click on a Peterson or Crowder or Shapiro thumbnail, and 
suddenly you find yourself inundated by increasingly more extreme views, frequently ending up watching videos of people saying "I identify as an attack helicopter". This is also true of the 'other' side - start with pro-LGBTQ 
content, and you will be slowly dragged to "all men are rapists by default" - there is a high cost to curiosity today. Meanwhile, the company (Facebook/Twitter/google) takes it upon itself to recommend more and more videos on 
the subject, actively helping your descent into madness and delusion. We have a sickness of the mind.
I do not believe this to be an actual disorder in the psychological sense (though I wouldn't know it was). I do not think there has been a sudden change in our collective brain chemistry, I do not think this represents a new 
phase in human evolution, and I do not believe this is God's punishment for our transgressions. I do believe we are exhibiting the same behavioral patterns as the Norwegian rats in Calhoun's experiments. I think we have a 
better chance of survival than the rats did.

My hypothesis is as follows:

Our bodies evolved under specific conditions, to perform a specific set of tasks in a certain way. There is a correct way of running, for instance, and there are many incorrect ways that result in injury or even long-term 
damage. I may have the exact physical makeup and structure as a professional athlete, but I could not hope to win a race against even a high-school athlete without first entering a long process of physical training, 
refinement of technique, and practice - and legs are a significantly simpler organ than the brain. There is a correct way of lifting heavy weights and many incorrect ways. Now if you were to lift a two-hundred kilogram weight 
in one of these 'incorrect' ways, and injure yourself, does it mean you were incapable of lifting the barbell, or just that you did it wrong? Every part of our body has a certain range of operability and a specific sweet spot 
where it functions best. To maximize performance and minimize wear and tear, it is recommended to stay within these ranges, and the further one strays from these bounds, the more serious the resultant injuries are likely to 
be. I claim something similar is true of our brains and thoughts. I believe that there is a 'right' way to use one's brain that allows one to achieve at least passable performance without the psychological wear and tear 
improper usage invariably occurs, and many, many 'wrong' ways that lead to psychological distress and damage. Further, I believe much of our apparent inability to deal with seemingly trivial problems or even problems with 
straightforward solutions, is precisely because of this cerebral misuse. Crucially, this deviation from the ‘ideal’ usage did not come naturally; there was definitely a time when as a species, we were much better equipped to 
deal with much more serious troubles. Of course, this depends on what one means by ‘well equipped’, which in turn depends on what one believes to be the ideal emotional state of the mind. Here, I go by the obvious - peace, 
and a lack of pain. Conventional wisdom treats the brain as a black box (which it is, in a way), with intelligence being an inevitable emergent property; whether speed or accuracy, it is assumed that these are inherent 
properties of the brain, and will result in commensurate performance both locally and globally. I find this an irritating idea; after all, most of us are born with the same general hardware. I have a body designed similar to 
professional athletes, but I could not hope to win a race against even a high-school athlete without first entering a long process of physical training, refinement of technique, and practice - and legs are a significantly 
simpler organ than the brain. So if it is true, that there is a ‘right’ technique, the correct way of breathing, the positioning of the arms and legs, the amount of swing, the takeoffs and landings at each step - then why 
should the brain be any different? Put simply, if one considered a hypothetical child with the exact mental faculties of Albert Einstein, can one be sure the child will achieve similar levels of success, atleast 
intellectually? Clearly not. Taken further, is it possible that the variation in intelligence is in fact entirely due to random luck?  As a toddler grows into a child, and starts thinking for themselves, is it the case, that 
the child’s long term prospects and intellectual potential comes down to whether or not the child just happened to choose this ‘correct’ way out of all the other suboptimal methods of organizing our internal states and 
information? As a trivial example, if, as a toddler, developed only slightly more self-confidence than others, would this increase the likelihood of misinterpretations of reality, and incorrect conclusions? And if this is 
true, could one not say that in this particular instance, inherent intelligence was truly irrelevant, as the specific performance of this intelligence, if such a thing is assumed to exist at all, depends more on these 
orthogonal qualities and the tradeoffs they imply, like self-confidence versus humility? After all, Albert Einstein certainly was confident enough to attempt to change the world of physics entirely while working as a clerk at 
a patent office, but also humble enough to admit not only that he could be wrong about some of his ideas, but even publicly denounced some of them. If he did not possess this quality, would his work have been any different?

Now, here’s the trouble with this idea; one, it is vague, as it pertains to a part of brain function that we still do not understand entirely, and two, for reasons described in the following chapter, and my own lack of skills 
as a writer, somewhat impossible to describe accurately. I have done my best, and I can only hope you understand. In any case, the previous discussion brings us to an important question: are we as individuals, supposed to 
simply live out our lifetimes with the IQ score we think defines us, or is it possible, by changing the way we process information, actually increase our apparent intelligence? I do not know, and I do not think anyone does 
with certainty, so let us pursue this idea further.

If we assume that ‘intelligence’ is less about physical and biological characteristics of the brain, and more about the way one learned to use it as a child, could we correct ourselves, and drag ourselves out of this 
seemingly bottomless pit of stupidity we suddenly find ourselves in?

How do we arrive at this 'right way'? This question lies at the confluence of several of our oldest and finest mysteries- the explanatory gap, consciousness, the lack of any clear method to distinguish good from evil, and is 
therefore clearly worth pursuing. There may be several of these 'correct' ways, there may be none at all, and it may even be that this entire idea is nonsense. And then there is always the inescapable possibility - the rats 
never had a chance, and neither do we. I do not think we truly know how much of ourselves is within our conscious control, and how much just feels that way, like a magician's force. If it is indeed the case, for example, that 
we have no real free will, we can call it a day and settle in, because our survival as a species would then be a matter of what 'happens' in our minds rather than what we 'think', and our ultimate fate is better enjoyed as a 
movie we cannot rewrite. I simply do not know. How should I proceed, then? Obviously, I must start with myself.

I am the average idiot. I have some qualifications, some competence, some skill and some knowledge in some domains. I am not an expert at anything. I know precious little about anything in the universe, and my general style 
is to prioritize over depth. However, I still want to be correct about everything. Specifically, I want to maximize my likelihood of being correct about everything I say, on any arbitrary topic; after all, not knowing the 
correct answers rarely is a matter of concern - assuming incorrect answers to be correct almost always is, so avoiding incorrectness is a more influential goal than being correct. But I am also lazy (or programmed to try to 
conserve energy), so I want to do so without spending the torturous, and endless periods of learning and practice that expertise demands. How do I achieve this? One possible strategy is to start with what I know for certain, 
and what I have the best chance of understanding - the windows through which we perceive the world, our senses.


Chapter 1: Thoughts concerning reality.

I am an alien. I am required to perform an assessment of all I can perceive with my unaided senses, and construct a consistent picture of my reality. Mysteriously, have a survival guide with all basic facts concerning the 
planet earth. I see trees, mountains, insects, animals. I see greens, blues, greys, whites, browns and blacks. I look up, and I see blue. I call it blue because I know that is what the colour is called, because the survival 
guide says the sky is blue. I do not know what blue is supposed to be, except as what my eyes see when I look up at the sky. If there were other extraterrestrial toddlers around, we would all agree - the sky is indeed blue. 
But none of us would know what the others meant by blue, and none would know if what they see is what others see. We cannot ever truly know the internal experiences of others. We cannot ever truly describe our own internal 
experiences. Our shared language allows us to use certain words as being representative of specific ‘ideas’; when I say I am happy, I am referring to ‘some’ positive emotion that I enjoy, that I have been told is called 
happiness. I do not know if what happiness feels like to me, internally, is what it would feel like to anyone else. I do not, and cannot know, if when two extraterrestrial alien toddlers say they are happy, they both are 
feeling the same emotion internally, or if the same chemical response ‘feels’ the same to both. When I say I am happy, I refer to the idea of happiness, rather than the specific emotion. The specific emotion cannot be 
referred to at all, because it cannot be described.
This is universal. 
As a simple exercise, imagine you were speaking to me, the alien toddler, on the phone. Your task is to make me understand the relative directions of ‘right’ and ‘left’. You cannot show me, because this is a phone call. How 
would you do it? It will quickly become clear this is an impossible task. For words that are so ubiquitous, representing ideas that are universally understood, we really have NO way of describing right and left without 
resorting to the words themselves or demonstrating it visually.

This leads us to our first major challenge. While we can aspire to share our respective perspectives, ideas or opinions, each of us uses a common language to describe experiences that seem to be fundamentally resistant to 
description. Our language therefore serves to take our individual, unique internal experiences and perception of reality, and normalise them into a finite set of qualitative properties, rendering the actual experience itself, 
irrelevant.

The Yahgan people (interestingly, forming the southernmost population of humans in the world) have a word of moderate internet popularity for being one of the hardest words to translate into English, mamihlapinatapai, 
described as "a look that without words is shared by two people who want to initiate something, but that neither will start". This word, in its myriad descriptions, has been interpreted both in a romantic sense, and within 
the context of the volunteer’s dilemma. It is indeed a beautiful word, but consider the following question: If one had never heard of this word, how would one go about describing the exact feeling the word describes? I do not 
have an answer. I recognize this feeling, and I am sure you do too. I know for a fact that I have lived my entire life without ever really noticing it; maybe in the absence of vocabulary associated with a particular feeling, 
the part of the brain that drives language simply gets bypassed - it has nothing to do, after all - and whatever mix of chemicals and firing neurons this feeling involves, it translates into lived experience instantly, so I 
can go from perceiving a situation that causes this particular feeling, to being submerged in it instantaneously, without ever thinking about the qualities of this feeling, or how I might describe it to someone else - I do 
not understand it, and I cannot describe it even to myself, but I know it. I see a crucial insight here: our conscious ‘volition’ is completely absent in this experience. In fact, if we consider our language to be something 
we voluntarily control, and if we consider (as I believe) that our volition, the conscious sense of being in control, only engages with our perception of reality, like a clutch to a transmission, only if it is required to, 
any internal experience that the brain hasn’t ‘learnt’ to describe (even if in its own internal language), will not involve conscious volition at all. Note that I do not refer to consciousness - consciousness in my view 
simply means the ability to observe, and therefore is not a matter of choice, but a prerequisite to have any experience at all, internal or external. I will go into this further in a later chapter. In any case, I believe this 
to be a correct description of my internal reality. For reasons described earlier, I do not, and cannot know if this is true for anyone else; I cannot even be certain it is true for me - as I will explain later, there is no 
way of determining if consciousness truly puts us in control of our thoughts or actions, or if consciousness is merely a camera pointing at the ‘events’ that the brain generates, our entire experience of ‘being’ essentially 
being a monkey watching a television - the monkey being consciousness, can only ‘perceive’ what it is fed - if the television says ‘happy’, the monkey feels happy, and if the television says ‘do not take that call’, the 
monkey does not take that call, all the while feeling it made the decisions, but in truth being merely a servant to internally involuntary and predetermined ‘events’ - predetermined by the laws of physics. To put simply, not 
only does there need to be conscious voluntary engagement in order to understand our experiences, it is also entirely possible (and in my view, likely) that this voluntary engagement itself is merely a simulation, the monkey 
watching the television as the television spews the station’s best guess at what it thinks it must cast, based on what it thinks its reality and circumstances are, its suitability and correctness being determined as much by 
the quality of its sources, our perception, as it is by the robustness of its own judgement.

Note that the English translation of this beautiful word does not describe the emotion itself. Instead, it merely describes the circumstances under which this emotion is known to arise; a reader is expected to read about the 
“the look without words” and immediately recognize the internal experience being described, while simultaneously being incapable of ever knowing if the feeling the tribespeople think of when they read the meaning of the word, 
is the same feeling that speakers of that language refer to; the speakers of that language will never know if the exact experience is the same as the one experienced by the person who coined the word. Our language, while 
providing a way of expressing our emotions and ideas, also restricts and atrophies those emotions and ideas and internal experiences that have not been named. As individuals, we are subject to a smorgasbord of complex 
emotional states that often change rapidly with the smallest changes in our circumstances; as individuals, we are free to observe these experiences, and understand them, and attempt to describe them. As members of a society, 
however, the futility in approaching these nameless emotional states, considering there fundamental incommunicability, we feel what our language allows us to; everything else is just a ‘mood’, as mysterious as it is 
debilitating. Culture and language together determine what one ‘can’ feel - and also what one ‘cannot’ feel. I should point out that the extent to which this is true, that is, whether this is simply a matter of the inability 
to verbalize complex internal states that are otherwise available to every functional brain to feel, or if language actually restricts and diminishes the set of internal states. The general consensus is that it absolutely 
does not - anyone can feel anything. But I do believe there is an effect; we are creatures of habit, and where repetition contributes to committing information to memory, disuse stemming from the lack of the vocabulary or 
competent self-reflection, in my view, desensitizes and ultimately reduces to unnoticable levels the experience of this internal state. Despite introducing this convenient approximation into what language is supposed to do, 
by letting it refer to ideas of emotional states rather than the emotional states themselves, each of us, for all intents and purposes, truly does live in a world entirely of our own involuntary construction. This is not 
merely a mawkish metaphor- everything we perceive, recognize, acknowledge, communicate, and act upon, is formed out of a careful simulation that our individual brains have manifested. We are each alone in our own simulations, 
locked out of the rest of the world, monkeys in sealed basements, a television they cannot control on the wall being their sole means of interacting with the world, task with perceiving and navigating an entire lifetime 
entirely lived an infinitesimal moment in the past, never being to directly perceive a single aspect of the world.


Our workaround to this seemingly impenetrable problem is to simply make an implicit assumption: all mentions of a particular emotional state represent the same emotional state, to the extent that the exact difference are 
irrelevant. Curiously, this assumption seems almost automatic, and the difference between what is felt and what is expressed is still uncommon knowledge; this often dubious approximation does not seem to bother most people. 
It does not matter if you and I refer to the same specific emotional state when we say we are angry - it only matters that we both think the word ‘angry’ is the best fit for our current emotional state. It is interesting that 
the English language, with its disappointingly small list of named emotional states, has several words for the area of the body between the genitals and the anus. I am sure there is an interpretation of this fact in terms of 
broader social implications; I leave that to you as an exercise.  We now get to the problem of perception itself. All sensory inputs we are capable of perceiving, namely touch, temperature, light, and sound, ultimately get 
translated into the same language of neural impulses before they can be perceived. Think about what this means.
I am an alien. I see trees, mountains, insects, animals. I see blues, greens, greys, browns, blacks. I hear the chirping of the birds, the rustling of leaves in the wind, the mating calls of random animals, the warm light 
from the sun. Physically, several forms of energy have interacted with my organs. Whether light, sound, or heat, this energy activates neurons, which in turn results in a cascade of messages destined to the brain and the 
spinal cord. The brain then reconstructs, based on these neural impulses, a picture of reality that it believes to be the most likely cause of these specific impulses. This ‘belief’, for lack of a better word, forms through 
learning, but is still riddled with vulnerabilities, and can be tricked quite easily. Consider one of those illusions that requires one to focus on a central point, which leads to the illusion of the entire picture moving or 
pulsating. We know for a fact that the picture isn’t moving. Pointing a camera at the picture does not result in a motion picture; a camera has no problem perceiving this ‘reality’ as it is. However, something in the exact 
structure of the image, when translated into electrical impulses, and then reconstructed in the brain, results in the very real internal experience of a static image that seems to move, warp and pulsate. Our perception of 
reality, therefore, is essentially a carefully (and often inaccurately) constructed hallucination - simply the brain’s best guess at the particular reality that could have resulted in the specific set of neural impulses that 
it has received. The likelihood of this guess depends primarily on whether or not it has been encountered before, and further, the likelihood of us having evolved to perceive the stimulus that led to this guess. The key 
insight here is that this misinterpretation of reality does not feel incorrect; in a way, it stands to reason that the brain cannot and will not consider incorrect what it has determined to be the correct construction of 
reality. This introduces a complication. How am I supposed to analyze my own flawed, fumbling, inaccurate brain, using the same brain to do the analysis?
The answer isn’t immediately obvious. Perhaps a further understanding of the limits of our perception might shed some light.
So what can we perceive, in terms of physical sensory inputs? There are obvious physical limits to our perception; our sensory organs can only perceive energetic inputs within a certain range of qualitative properties that 
are well-known. For example, our eyes can only perceive light within a specific range of wavelengths, our ears can perceive sound within a specific range of frequencies, and so on, being limited in the range of inputs they 
can correctly perceive simply because it is unbelievably difficult, perhaps impossible, to have any sensory mechanism (or artificial construction, for that matter) that has an infinite resolution; even the most sophisticated 
instrumentation humans have built, like those on space probes, function within a specific range that must be determined beforehand, during the design itself. There is, however, a secondary limit on these ranges. These are 
limits that are not physical in origin, but rather the result of millions of years of evolution through the specific circumstances that surrounded every single organism since the birth of our planet; every mutation, every 
population that thrived as a result of these mutations, every population that perished, all in some way influenced these limits, by essentially limiting their ‘resolution’ to what is needed for survival, and nothing more. For 
example, with the unaided eye, an average human will have no difficulty distinguishing an inch from a foot, or a yard from a mile, or a second from a minute.
On the other hand, the average human (without the use of instruments) will find it challenging to distinguish between a tenth and a fifteenth of a millimetre, or a hundred miles from a hundred and five miles, or a quarter of 
a second from a fifth of a second. The physical reason is just the resolution of our sensory organs; the evolutionary reason is that this is all we needed, and any more would have been wasted energy. While we have masterfully 
overcome these limits through the use of brilliantly constructed instruments and measurement devices, they still do exist, and it is important to understand why they exist. There are two approaches available here. One, is to 
claim, with honourable honesty, that I have no idea why these exist, and why the specific limits at which our ability to distinguish quantities fails are what they are. The other, slightly more productive (but ultimately 
unprovable) interpretation is through the lens of natural selection. This is something I will use frequently through the book; that is not to say every idea analysed in this fashion actually is the result of some process of 
natural selection, but it does provide a very elegant way of explaining things. Of course, that also does not mean every analysis performed in this way is incorrect. Instead, for the purposes of this discussion (and all the 
others in the rest of this book), correctness is not the primary consideration. We are attempting to construct a picture of reality that allows us to explain ‘most’ properties of our existence with the least number of 
‘special cases’; in other words, this is more in pursuit of a framework that is convenient to use across topics. Once we have managed this, we will need to fine tune for correctness, but that is for later. Within this 
context, therefore, one might suggest for instance that for an average human, a difference of about a quarter of a second could well be the difference between life and death from a falling branch; effective reactions for 
survival require resolutions of at least about a quarter second.

I am an alien. During the course of my travels across the planet, I have encountered predators, prey, random weather events, and falling branches. If the branch directly overhead were to fall, let’s say it would take about a 
half second from the moment of detachment from the rest of the tree, to the moment it crushes me to death. For me to survive this, my ears first need to pick up the sound of the branch breaking. This sound must then be 
converted via the eardrum, from pressure waves in the air, to electrical impulses. These impulses then travel to the brain, which realises there is insufficient information to determine what could have caused this sound - but 
it is also convinced there is a potentially dangerous situation here, and therefore additional information must be obtained immediately. My eyes shoot up, without ever thinking of doing so. I see the branch, now beginning to 
slide through the canopy. Without ever thinking about my next course of action, I jump out of the way. A fraction of a second later, the branch comes crashing down. I escape with minor bruises, and the knowledge that the 
conscious part of me had absolutely no contribution to my survival in this situation. The critical factor that saved me is the time scales at which my brain, in conjunction with the communications it engages in with my 
muscles, is able to operate. To a certain fraction of a second, this autopilot results in favourable results with some significant reliability. If the branch were a tenth of a second away from my head, because there is little 
chance I would survive even with this timely engagement of autopilot mode, there is little point to having the ability to perceive time on the order of tenths of a second, or smaller fractions. Similarly convenient arguments 
can be made for our senses of distance, sound, and temperature. The specific limits are not important here - what is important is to recognize that without the aid of instruments either as enhancements to our senses or as 
measurement devices, the following is always true:


1. A very narrow slice of what exists as reality, is available to be perceived.

2. Within this narrow slice, there are limits on how much of this slice we can meaningfully process and act on. 

3. What we perceive of this slice, is not what the slice is, but the brain’s best guess at the reality that could have resulted in the specific set of neural impulses that the brain has received.

4. The picture of reality that the brain has constructed is further filtered through language, resulting in an even narrower set of recognizable internal experiences that we can actually understand as meaning ‘something’.

6. Any analysis of our internal reconstruction of our reality quickly results in an impasse, as this self-referential pursuit ultimately hits the point where ‘I’ must both explain and understand ‘I’’. It seems obvious this 
will be impossible, and it is, though I do not know why exactly. What this means, is that absolute confidence in any observation unaided by formal measurement is foolish - if ‘correctness’ is a consideration. The above 
treatment is merely one of many ways of interpreting reality. It is therefore important to realise that while convenience and elegance of such a mental model are definitely important, convenience and elegance does not imply 
correctness. Whether one thinks in terms of evolution, or divinely ordained instruction, or any of the innumerable interpretations of reality by cultures throughout human history, often mixing the mundane and the 
supernatural, such anecdotal observations, whether about the external world or our internal state, must always be understood, always, to be potentially faulty because of the aforementioned reasons. In fact, it is the stubborn 
refusal to acknowledge these limits that causes much of the constant, irritating friction with certain groups that deny basic observations about the world. A 'climate-change denier' is not merely rejecting science and 
scientists out of spite. There is the strong underlying conviction that the fact that one perceives changes in temperatures and seasons, variations in the weather, is absolute proof that any 'climate change' is simply a 
transient phenomenon. This, as is the case typically, is a direct consequence of never having acknowledged 'unknown unknowns'. Most people have no idea how complex climate science is

Note that we have left out an important consideration: psychological weaknesses. Cognitive biases, heuristics, and all the mental shortcuts that human decision making often involves, have been studied in great detail, and a 
simple google search will present much more accurate information than I can. For the purposes of our treatment of humans as not special introductions by a creator, but rather as autonomous meat-robots that can perceive 
stimuli both internal or external, but the stimuli themselves (whether thought or emotion) are events that ‘happen’ in the mind rather than being voluntarily conjured, with the sense of volition being merely a simulation.







______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________


























2. On free will.

The previous discussion makes clear the fact that given these foundational deficiencies in the way our brain processes information and the limits to what is even possible for the brain, one must try to obtain a practically useful model of the brain, the ‘mind’, and the self. Specifically, an analysis of how these intangible ideas lead to an identity, the idea of free will and the ability to make judgements and decisions given competing ideas would lead to, if nothing else, a better understanding of the tools at our disposal, how they are engineered and how they function, which lets us proceed to how best to use these tools.


Once again, none of this is meant to be factually accurate. The aim, as before, is to create, with no starting assumptions, as the alien,  an educated guess how these pieces might fit together and contribute to the specific experience of ‘being’, and how all the consequent side-effects arise.  This model merely must have some utilitarian value; if it helps avoid some common pitfalls that arise due to an over-reliance on the ‘autopilot’ mode of the brain, it has value. In particular, I must clarify that while we still do not understand consciousness, let alone explaining it, what I present is not a competing hypothesis. It is merely a functional framework that has allowed me to have some objectivity in analysing my own self. 

I must clarify what I mean by consciousness here. Clearly there are levels to conscious experience, corresponding to varying levels of voluntary engagement. There is a baseline awareness that allows any perception at all, and 
is only determined by wakefulness in a healthy brain. This is not our focus here; being able to consciously perceive is nothing special in my opinion; it is still mysterious and lacking a clear explanation of its underlying 
processes, but I find this ‘soft’ consciousness to be a much more challenging property to study, precisely because it is ‘quiet’. There is no way of interacting with this aspect, and in fact any interaction would be 
necessarily circular, attempting to use this baseline awareness to study the same awareness, like trying to use a camera to photograph itself. It makes some intuitive sense to me, but I can go no further.

Volition, on the other hand, even though just as impenetrable, is slightly easier to approach. Consider the classic magician’s opening: think of a number. I find this provides fascinating insight into what I consider my free 
will.

“Think of a number”. I say 7.
What do I notice in this interaction? I know a few things with certainty. One, I spent barely any time in making this decision. Two, I did not think about the infinite set of real numbers and try to choose one. Three, I did 
not voluntarily invoke some internal random number generator to give me a random number. Four, I did not actually think at all; I heard the question, and the answer formed in my head, with absolutely no conscious involvement. 
I did not voluntarily choose a number at all. “I”, my conscious self, basically stood idle, and watched as a question was thrown at me, and something said 7, and I heard it come out of my mouth. (By something, I only refer to 
some part of the brain or one or more of its processes: I do not understand how it works, and that is sufficiently mysterious for me to be comfortable assigning the origin of my entire experience of existence to this bit of 
meat, without involving supernatural beings. No gods or ghosts needed.) I do not know why it was 7, and not 9 or 13 or a trillion. So if the following question was “Why did you choose 7”, my answer would have been “I do not 
know”.

I find that the moment I (or my brain’s backend) understood the demand, a number popped into existence in my mind. The monkey in the basement suddenly found the number ‘7’ on the television screen. The monkey then ‘perceives’ 
this number, and is immediately convinced that it was the one that thought of the number 7. In a way, it is as if the monkey and the television are so tightly coupled that they operate as a single system as opposed to 
separate entities; the televisions dictations directly and immediately enter the monkey’s fantasy of being the progenitor of all these internal experiences. I have no reason to choose the number seven over any other, and no 
reasons were considered - the process that runs the television heard the question and put 7 on the television. Of course, over time, certain biases and habits may make it more likely for certain numbers to show up on 
television over others, but these are typically seriously challenging to understand solely through introspection.  The monkey can only see the television. The monkey has no control over the television. The monkey has no way 
of knowing if the same process that controls the television, controls the monkey too. It is as likely as not, therefore, that the reactions of the monkey to the content on the television, are also as involuntary as the 
television itself. Therefore, the monkey’s belief that it is free to choose its destiny, is not merely emergent behavior, but a deliberate creation by the same process that controls the television. I invite you to try this 
yourself.
Think of a number. Now ask yourself, why that particular number of the infinitely many others? Where did that number come? Was there voluntary effort involved in the ‘thinking’ of this number? Was there any deliberation at 
all? Or was it the case that you saw the question, and you were just ‘presented’ a number by something in your mind? When I pause to find the best way to put down an idea into a sentence, am I actively searching for a better 
alternative, or am I merely waiting for a better alternative to present itself to my awareness?
As you read this, every sentence is going through the same pipeline; your eyes are pointed at a region of interest on the page, this image is sent to the brain as an electromagnetic impulse, and with no conscious involvement 
or voluntary cognitive effort, you instantly ‘understand’ what has been written. You did not need to actively move your eyes across the page; your eyes just did so. Somehow, your eyes knew to move horizontally to the right, 
and at the end of the line, go one line down and all the way to the left, and start again. The moment the brain saw the image created by the eyes, it identified that it was English. Each sentence is parsed and processed using 
the rules of grammar that it has learnt in the past, and the meaning is not just derived, but understood instantaneously.  I do not know how this happens, biologically, physically or psychologically. What I do know is that 
this entire process of parsing language happens without any conscious effort on my part. In addition, this is an instantaneous process, meaning if it is a sensible sentence that is not too complex, it takes no time at all 
between perceiving the symbols on the page and ‘knowing’ what it means. In other words, somehow, understanding seems to be more a state rather than a process, in much the same way that thinking seems to be something that 
happens, rather than an action that is performed. This extends not just to prompts, but every single thought that I have ever had, and will ever have. If my thoughts were truly in my control, I should be able to decide to 
have a certain thought at a certain time. I invite you to try this out and report your findings. Let’s say I want to think about dogs exactly five minutes from now.
In my experience, what typically happens is I either find myself unable to stop thinking of dogs until the moment I am supposed to start, rendering the experiment meaningless, or I forget entirely. In other words, I can place 
an internal request, but it may or may not be fulfilled: I have no control over the success of the experiment. I do not know if this is a quirk of my own construction, or universal, but I find I can NOT decide to think a 
certain thought. In fact, all mental notes made as reminders, require me to place implicit faith in my internal alarm clock; I could plan to wake up at 6 am, but I cannot be sure I will - while also knowing I cannot be sure 
that I won’t. Internal planning is therefore, in my opinion, a fundamentally unreliable pursuit, depending more on the serendipitous activity of this ‘backend’ of the brain, the part that runs the television, rather than the 
power of our own aspirations. At the same time, it is also true that for the duration that I am engrossed in reading a sentence, I do not perceive myself. This could be a matter of attention, but this state of being ‘lost’ in 
activity seems a more fundamentally different state, a state in which consciousness and self-awareness simply do not exist. In fact, common wisdom suggests the quality of a book can be measured by how totally it subdues 
consciousness - which is what being ‘lost in the story’ is. In a way, it is as if instead of your conscious identity being involved in the book, it’s the process that runs the television that is interested, and has therefore 
taken over. This leads to the question: when you are truly engrossed in reading a book or watching a movie, who exactly is being entertained? It certainly isn’t your conscious self; your conscious self is the monkey, and it 
knows to be entertained when the television asks it to be, but when you have no conscious control, awareness, or even intention in your perusal of this entertaining activity, how can You be the one enjoying it? And if it is 
possible for you to believe you are actively involved in enjoying an activity when it isn’t true, what is the function of ‘you’ at all? Clearly, your body can operate and even thrive without involving consciousness at all. 
This raises some new questions: Is there a ‘baseline’ level of self-awareness and conscious experience that underlines a person’s entire lifetime?
What determines the degree of conscious engagement, or even the experience of ‘being’ at all? If the experience of consciousness is not binary, but a continuum, and if unconsciousness is one extreme, what does the other 
extreme look like? If consciousness is what grants us our free will (whether illusory or otherwise), is it even possible for the engagement of consciousness to be voluntary? Is consciousness simpler than we think it is?

To me, it is clear that the common idea of our conscious identity being the central character in our internal adventure is simply incorrect. A crude depiction might be something like this:


What does it mean to ‘think’, really? I am tempted to attempt first defining thought, but any definition that deviates from what is commonly understood by the colloquial term ‘thinking’ will be ultimately irrelevant. 
Additionally, defining thinking is no trivial matter for reasons outlined in the previous section. That aside, I do believe thinking is something that ‘happens’, rather than something that is performed.
Seen differently, consider a population of beings that naturally live under trees. The task is to ‘evolve’ a certain optimum reaction time, balancing the energy expenditure and sensory load of fast reaction times, with the 
likelihood of this expenditure increasing their chances of surviving a falling branch. It is certainly possible, through purely random mutations, that this reaction time is higher in certain individuals, and lower in others, 
even significantly so. If falling branches were taken to be the only evolutionary pressure in this toy world, the average time it takes for a branch to fall on someone’s head is the order in which reactions must be 
formulated. For a hypothetical individual that takes three quarters of a second to react to this branch, survival is a tricky proposition, and it is likely that either the individual, or the individual’s descendants will 
eventually succumb to a falling branch, and the ancestral line would be terminated eventually. On the other hand, while an individual capable of reaction times in the order of tenths of a second potentially has a higher 
chance of surviving a falling branch than one capable of reacting in, say, a quarter of a second, it is unclear if this smaller reaction time will actually translate to a higher survival probability, simply because the mere 
ability to perceive threats rapidly does not necessarily lead to survival - there also needs to be a sufficiently quick follow-up involving moving the entire body away from the path of the falling branch. This introduces 
additional requirements, such as the ability of the individual’s muscles to respond rapidly to an instruction from the brain, or generally, how quickly the individual’s body allows them to move at all. Shorter reaction times 
certainly could be important in other situations, but as far as falling branches go, quarter-second-reactors do not have a particularly lower chance of survival than tenth-second-reactors. On the other hand, sensitivity 
definitely has a more significant weight on survival. Individuals with sensitive ears, even with a higher reaction time, can survive falling branches if they can pick up the signs that a branch is able to fall earlier. This 
brings an important idea: evolution via natural selection is not a divinely ordained quest for continuous improvement, nor is it a cosmic collaboration to slowly, but eventually, create perfect beings. In fact, it is often 
quite the opposite - “survival of the fittest” is a fairly reasonable adage, but I believe a better representation of the process to be “death of everyone unsuitable for long-term survival”. This more accurately represents 
the simple, unintelligent inevitability of the process rather than the suggestion of some secret mechanism that improves beings across millions of years. The truth is, unless an individual in a population has traits that 
increase their likelihood of dying before they have reproduced, it is likely they will pass on their traits to the next generation - for a trait to be advantageous, the immediate environment and circumstances must be such 
that this trait will actually be the difference between life and death. Evolution is much better understood metaphorically, as a natural force whose sole purpose is to kill all life. Under this paradigm, in order to survive, 
a species must either actively modify itself or its surroundings, or wait hoping an individual with the right mutation is born, upon which those mutated genes will be more likely to pass on their genes; the default ‘drive’ is 
not to specialize organisms into perfect survival machines, but to cause extinctions, and every single individual missing the mutations that a particular change in its environment will die. In addition, the specific traits 
that might prove to be a disadvantage change as well, as our local circumstances are fluid, and moreover, human societies, in a biological sense, are frequently locked in a loop of acclimation and modifications to our 
environment. Therefore, to some non-trivial extent, every few generations, the qualities that are beneficial and those that are detrimental, change depending on the specific modifications to the environment and lifestyle that 
previous generations have manifested. In particular, the traits that could have been instrumental to a populations’ survival at some time in the far past, can be rendered entirely irrelevant if the environment has been 
sufficiently modified. A simple example of this is our fear response. I will describe my ideas on this front in greater detail in a later chapter, but for now, consider the following:

I am an alien. I am in my cave. There are no lights, and it is pitch-black inside. I hear rustling leaves outside. I do not know what caused it. I can think of three possibilities - wind, predators, or prey. If it is the 
wind, I need not analyze this noise any further. If it is a predator, it is in my best interest to stay quiet within the cave. If it is prey, were I able to catch it, would likely keep me fed for several days or weeks. One 
possibility increases my chances of survival, one puts me at potentially fatal risk, and one makes no difference. How must I decide my course of action here? In the absence of additional information, all three options are 
equally appropriate. I must rely on my emotional state to decide. I feel fear. I feel anxious about the prospect of a predator outside my cave, a predator I most likely will not survive. I also know that were it a small prey 
animal, missing this meal will not kill me - I can still hunt the next morning. In my pitch black cave, with the sound of rustling leaves being the only sensory input, I have to choose between fear of a predator, interest in 
fresh meat, and the tranquil joys of a cool night’s breeze. If I sided with fear, I am not only more likely to survive the night, I am also more likely to consider this the correct response in all similar situations 
throughout my life. If I were to have offspring with some other extraterrestrial toddler, I would likely teach this offspring the same lesson - do not approach noises in the dark. If I sided with the excitement for the 
prospect of a meal, I might get to be stronger, for sure. But in addition, I am also less likely to be afraid of mysterious noises of this sort. If I were to have offspring with some other extraterrestrial toddler, I would 
likely teach this offspring the same lesson - mysterious noises could be a great meal. As long as I am correct, I get to eat more meals than other extraterrestrial toddlers. The moment I am wrong, I am no more. Consider just 
these two emotional states of anxiety and anticipation, and let us change the circumstances within which these emotions arise to our present world. There are innumerable sources of sounds one might be surrounded by; it is 
almost certain most of these sources will be unknown to an individual. It is also extremely unlikely in today’s world, that any of these sources could represent a potentially fatal encounter. In addition, even if one of these 
noises represented a prey and a good meal, it is highly unlikely one would need to hunt at all. Therefore, the rustling leaves that led to a cascade of emotional states which in turn were instrumental in making a decision 
while I was in the cave, are not only almost guaranteed to be benign today, it is in fact unlikely I would pay any attention to it at all. If I did, I believe I would still be subject to the same emotional states, roughly, 
but they would not only be irrelevant, they would likely be considered an impediment to emotional comfort. Being afraid of rustling leaves helped me survive the cave, and my entire lineage ever since has been afraid of 
rustling leaves as a sort of ancestral memory (or a hereditary trait, doesn’t really matter). In addition, more extraterrestrial toddlers that were afraid of rustling leaves survived, than the ones that didn’t, and therefore 
there exist more individuals today that are afraid of rustling leaves than those that aren’t. Because fear was definitely advantageous to immediate survival, and because those that succumbed to this fear simply had a higher 
likelihood of survival than my other ‘courageous’ brethren over the years that went out hoping to catch prey but ended up being mauled by wolves. anxiety and fear have been selected for, in an evolutionary sense. However, 
when these traits that have had a long history of saving the lives of extraterrestrial toddlers are suddenly rendered moot, I have to deal with crippling fear in situations that do not deserve it. In fact, there are few 
situations in an average contemporary human’s lifetime that deserve genuine fear. But the mechanisms that generate this emotional state have not been bred away yet - they continue to exist and persist. In a world where the 
next day is rife with uncertainty, and every day could realistically be my last, being anxious of what the future holds definitely could lead to a higher rate of survival. In a world where the average life is extremely 
monotonous, where even in the rare unusually dangerous situations the risk to life is still minimal, this fear is now the greatest impediment to my own happiness. Clearly, this is not something I can change. Evolution is an 
incredibly long process, with changes that tend to manifest not in a period of years or decades, but generations, taking thousands, even millions of years. In the absence of a promising workaround, the best course of action 
at this point is to merely acknowledge this presence of distressing emotions that can significantly damage one’s quality of life, and appreciate the fact that the changing social and personal circumstances surrounding a 
person today are guaranteed to, over time, make irrelevant many of the emotional alarm-calls that were once instrumental to our survival. I believe this to be of critical importance, especially today; of course, I have no 
evidence, or even a reason to believe this idea to be true, but I do suspect the sudden and apparently unexpected rise of mental illness, especially among the young, is precisely because of how much the world has changed in 
the past few decades, and the effect that the removal of stimulating events that affect the parts of our mind that are responsible for these emotional states has on a healthy brain - a mind afraid in a cave is sensible, but a 
missing cave should not mean the mind is now ill. Of course, this ultimately comes down to what one calls an illness; any condition, property, or quality that persistently leads to a reduced quality of life could be called an 
illness in a way, which would make all chronic distressing emotional patterns illnesses.




-> Random musings while high
hiraeth: Homesick for a place that no longer exists.
NOTES:

Sections:
On our reality
On Thinking
Thinking about things while high
On intelligence.
On religion.
On democracy. 
On progress.
On culture.
On what language tells us to feel.
The climate footprint of nonsense
A list of proposed ridiculous rules in celebration of a hypothetical anarchist dystopia/ Constitutional theory for the end times
Assorted thought experiments.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZkA5mLPdQpU
Losing your hair is a sign that you have served your ordained purpose, and it is now time to withdraw from society.
Absolute good: Ashens violin. 
Fundamental goal of life: “Why are we here” vs “what are we supposed to be doing”: “Maximize predictability” paradigm.


1. Cherry-colored Funk by the Cocteau Twins makes me feel an emotion that has no name. It has a definite physical component to it. The first time I heard it, it was unexpected. Every hair on my body stood on end, tears welled in my eyes without warning, the skin on my head felt like it had been dipped in ice, and for a few brief moments during the chorus, my sense of self, even my sense of being, vanished without a trace, and all that was left was an amorphous cloud of pure amazement. Everyone has felt this at times, and everyone knows exactly what I describe. It is either strange, or obvious, that we have no word for it. 
We have several words for the area of the body between the anus and the genitals. 
Anyway, twenty listens later, I was sick of it. 

Everything is a fucking ad. Piracy will be back, and I welcome it. I endorse pirating books, movies, and music you cannot afford, until the piracy results in a significant net loss for the creator of the pirated thing.

Cars should have tactile buttons they can find by feel. Not stupid touch screens you have to look at to use.

Happiness is a carrot on a stick. For the vast majority of people in the world, in my opinion, true, long-term, secure happiness is simply unattainable. The constant insistence on the pursuit of happiness is therefore odd; after all, the lack of happiness has never bothered people, it's the presence of negative emotions, sadness, despair, anger, frustration, that creates problems. It is therefore only rational to say that the pursuit of happiness is a self-defeating goal, but if the goal is set to deliberately minimize misery, happiness automatically emerges. This might sound like InstaWisdom(tm), but if you can't find the simple logic that I see in it, typing more is not going to mske s difference. 

True independence is not when you aren't dependent on anyone, but when no one depends on you. 

I suspect much of the recent explosion of mental health as a public health concern, as well as the easiest "awareness project" for budding socialites, is because at its core, it's aim is to absolve people of the vagaries of their own mind. I only need the following arguments:
1. It is a known problem of psychology, that it gains not only its context, but standards, measures of 'normal', the norms themselves, even the opinions and evidence that forms western psychology is only relevant within regions that are psychologically and culturally sufficiently similar to western societies. This means that much of the discussion around mental health simply does not apply in many other countries. We are the same species, and we have the same basic layouts, but the human brain is only meat when it is born. Every aspect of its behavior is learnt, developed, or emerges over time. This crucially includes standards of 'pain', which is ultimately what determines whether a condition must be considered a mental illness, and whether it must be considered a condition at all.
